Akong Rinpoche in the Temple at Samye Ling Chöje Akong Rinpoche is a tulku in the Kagyu school of Tibetan Buddhism and a founder of the Samye Ling Monastery .
He was born in 1939 , near Riwoche in Kham , Eastern Tibet .
At the age of two he was discovered by the search party seeking the reincarnation the previous ( 1st ) Akong , Abbot of Dolma Lhakang monastery in the Chamdo area of Kham .
The search party was following instructions given by the 16th Karmapa .
At four he was taken to Dolma Lhakang to receive an education that included religion and traditional Tibetan medicine .
When only a teenager , he travelled performing religious ceremonies and treating the ill. Later he went to the great monastic university of Sechen , where he received transmission of the Kagyu lineage from Sechen Kongtrul Rinpoche.He also received instruction from the 16th Karmapa , who also certified him as a teacher of Tibetan medicine .
In 1959 , in the aftermath of the occupation of Tibet by China , he fled to India .
After spending time in refugee camps he was asked to teach at a school for young tulkus in Dalhousie , NW India .
Then in 1963 a sponsor paid for Akong and Trungpa Tulku to go to Oxford to learn English .
As only Trungpa had a bursary , Akong Rinpoche worked as a hospital orderly in the Radcliffe Infirmary , supporting himself as well as Trungpa Rinpoche and Tulku Chime who had joined them .
He cofounded ( with Chogyam Trungpa ) the Kagyu Samye Ling Monastery and Tibetan centre in Scotland , and also founded ROKPA , a charity working to alleviate poverty in Tibet , Nepal and South Africa .
In 1992 , Akong Rinpoche was one of the main people to discover the reincarnation of the 16th Karmapa Urgyen Drodul Trinley Dorje , and took him to two of the regents , Tai Situpa and Goshir Gyatsabpa responsible for locating the reincarnation .
A rival candidate for the 17th Karmapa is supported by the Shamarpa ( cf .
Karmapa controversy ) .
But if we are ever to find true peace or happiness it is that wildness within which must be faced and dealt with.Akong Rinpoche 's younger brother Lama Yeshe Losal , has now taken over some of his duties as abbot of Samye Ling .
Не was born on June 6 1946 in Cortland , New York .
After his honorable discharge he joined The Elves after the band 's original keyboardist , Doug Thaler , was injured in a car accident that killed guitarist Nick Pantas .
Shortly after Soule was recruited the band changed their name to Elf and enjoyed minor fame as the opening act for Deep Purple .
After a few years , a few more members and two albums , Soule and the rest of Elf ( minus their guitarist ) were transformed into Ritchie Blackmore 's Rainbow , featuring Deep Purple guitarist Ritchie Blackmore .
During this time a third and final Elf album Trying to Burn the Sun was recorded when the former Elves were not in the studio recording Rainbow 's debut album .
Blackmore fired the entire line up with the exception of Dio before the first Rainbow tour .
Incidentally , in 1974 , he also sang the lead vocals on 'No Solution ' , from Roger Glover 's 'The Butterfly Ball and the Grasshopper 's Feast '
Soule would later tour France with The Ian Gillan Band .
His son Matt Soule , plays drums in the Los Angeles alternative rock band , Where 's Moo .
Futurama is a 3D platform game based on the science fiction cartoon series Futurama .
